---
date: '2020-01-05 19:23 -0800'
published: true
title: Decade in Review 2010-2019
---
In loose category and no particular order, other than I think they warrant mentioning.

**Personal**

*  Communications and mental health. Two things that really greatly influenced me was reading _Nonviolent Communications_ and doing  [Mood Gym](https://moodgym.com.au/).
* Inclusion (continuation). Compared to last decade I’ve practiced in larger groups and communities, from workplace to church.  Two books that stick with me are _White Fragility_ and _Dear Church: A Love Letter From a Black Preacher to the Whitest Denomination in the US_.
* Business. I incorporated my own business, [Day of the Shirt](https://dayoftheshirt.com), for which I’ve been filing taxes, hiring contractors, and businessing since 2011.
* Fiction. Malazan Book of the Fallen. Jemisin’s Inheritance and broken Earth trilogies. Up to book 26 of _The Cat Who…_. Remembrance of Earth’s Past trilogy. And the entirety of Discworld.
* Many deaths. Dottie Stephens. Many folks from Church: Dale, Clifton, Sam, Kirsten. 
* Affluence and finance. The move to software engineering has had a four-fold increase on my income. As well as the matters of founders stock, options, shares, RSUs, etc. We bought a new car.  

**Family**

* Marriage. Angelina and I got married in 2014 in San Francisco. We’ve also been together for the entirety of the decade.
* Membership organizations (continuation). I became a member of St. Francis Lutheran Church, the South End Rowing Club, Golden Gate Angling and Casting Club, and numerous museums. 
* Cat changes. We lost Jose Pierpont, but gained Sally Ride and Billie Jean King.  
* Extended family. Living near a lot of extended family has been a new experience and we’ve gained many new nephews and nieces around the country.
- Spending time together. This decade has been marked by a ramping up of  weekend trips and travel, from Calistoga to Australia. 

**Career**

- San Francisco.  8 years of this decade have been spent in San Francisco, longer even then my time in Boston where I spent the majority of the naughties.
- Transition from community-based work to software/tech. Shutting down the Transmission Project and Digital Arts Service Corps was hard. Software/Tech is fine.  
- I have great appreciation for friends and colleagues who have introduce me to the body of work on ergonomics is software development. For example, DevOps, Extreme programming, TDD, and Christopher Alexander.
* Facilitation, Coaching and Sponsorship (continue). Still doing it.
